Now let's bring translation into the picture.
Coordinate frame A, Coordinate frame B which
is translated and rotated with respect to
coordinate frame A and a point P. We can represent
the point P by a vector with respect to frame
B and that vector can be described in terms
of its components along the XB and YB axis.
Now we can rotate that vector into a new frame,
coordinate frame V, and coordinate frame V
has axes which are parallel to coordinate
frame A. We've already talked about how to
rotate a vector from one coordinate frame
to another using a rotation matrix. And as
a sanity check that we've written this expression
correctly, we noticed that these two Bs are
next to each other. That's a good thing.
Now let's describe the origin of coordinate
frame V with respect to coordinate frame A
and we do that with a vector. That's a vector
from A to V. Now we're allowed to add vectors
so we can add this vector ATV to the vector
VP to obtain the vector that describes the
point P with respect to coordinate frame A.
We can do that because these two vectors are
described with respect to coordinate frames
whose axes are parallel to one another. I
can substitute one equation into the other
and write this. And again because these two
coordinate frames are parallel I can write
this.
Let's expand the vectors and matrix in this
expression and write them in terms of their
elements. Now I can pull a little bit of a
trick and now write it like this. If you're
unsure about this step, expand out the matrix
and convince yourself that they are exactly the same.
Now this expression has got a two-element
vector and a three-element vector over here.
Let's make things a little bit more symmetric
and write it like this. What we've done now
is added some zeros and some ones to the bottom
row of the matrix. Previously we had a 2x2
rotation matrix. Now we see that that's embedded
into the top left corner of a 3x3 matrix.
And our vectors which used to have 2 elements
now have three elements. We can write this
even more succinctly in this form. The notation,
the tilde, above the little p indicates that
it is a homogeneous vector. It has got three
elements not two, and we'll talk about that
in just a moment. The point is described with
respect to coordinate frame A by a homogeneous
vector which we can obtain from the homogeneous
vector of the point with respect to coordinate
frame B multiplied by this matrix.
The elements of the matrix include the rotation
matrix, which is the function of the orientation;
Theta, and the translation between the origin
of coordinate frame A and coordinate frame
B. We have the familiar representation of
a vector in a 2-dimensional plane, two numbers
A and B. The homogeneous vector has got three
elements in it. It's got A and B and an additional
element which is set to 1. This we refer to
as a homogeneous transformation. It is a 3x3
matrix. The homogeneous transformation matrix
T comprises a rotation matrix which is 2x2
and a translation vector which is a 2x1 matrix
padded out with a couple of zeros and a one.
This matrix describes a relative pose. It
describes the pose B with respect to the pose
of A. All of that is encoded in this single
3x3 matrix. A mathematician would say that
transformação homogênea pertence ao grupo
Euclidiano especial da dimensão 2. Simbolicamente,
diríamos que a matriz T pertence ao conjunto SE (2).
Finalmente, é hora de começar a tornar reais esses
conceitos abstratos. Pose é apenas uma matriz. Onde
tínhamos o símbolo ksi antes de podermos substituir
essa matriz de transformação homogênea 3x3.
Quando falamos em compor ou unir
duas poses usando o operador O +,
isso é exatamente o mesmo que multiplicar essas
duas transformações homogêneas. Nós usamos o
operador O- para indicar a negação de uma pose relativa
ou seja, simplesmente o inverso
de uma matriz de transformação homogênea. Eu
Mencionei anteriormente que o inverso de uma matriz
de rotação é igual à sua transposta. Isso não
é o caso de uma matriz de transformação homogênea
homogênea. Você precisa calcular uma matriz inversa
adequada: inverta uma matriz 3x3.
Introduzimos um operador de ponto que transforma
um vetor de um quadro de coordenadas em outro.
E isso é simplesmente o produto da matriz de
transformação homogênea e o vetor representado
na forma homogênea. Lembre-se de que o vetor homogêneo
é obtido do vetor original
P, para o vetor dois pode ser aumento ou anexamos
a ele um elemento para que tenhamos uma vetor de três
componentes.
Aqui estamos no MATLAB e vamos experimentar
essas matrizes de transformação homogêneas
bidimencionais. Então, o que eu vou fazer é introduzir
uma função chamada transl2, que cria uma
transformação homogênea representando uma
rotação pura, que é uma rotação
de 1 na direção x e 2 na direção y.
Anteriormente, vimos como criar uma matriz de rotação
bidimensional, por exemplo, um giro
de 30 graus é criado. Vemos que
essa matriz de rotação é apenas 2x2 em comparação
com a matriz de transformação homogênea 3x3.
Para que eu possa criar uma matriz de transformação
homogênea equivalente a essa rotação fixamos
a letra T. Esta função retorna uma
matriz de transformação homogênea 3x3. Podemos
ver a parte da matriz de rotação no
canto superior esquerdo. Podemos ver que a parte da
rotação dessa matriz é igual a zero. Essa
matriz de transformação homogênea representa uma
uma rotação pura.
Agora podemos multiplicar os dois juntos. transl2, multiplique pela parte de rotação - 30 graus.
E agora o que tenho é uma transformação homogênea que representa uma pose.
Tem um componente rotacional e um componente translacional.
Agora, a caixa de ferramentas possui uma função abreviada para conseguir isso.
Passo nas partes translacionais x e y;
a parte rotacional nos dá a opção
de dizer que esse ângulo é especificado em unidades
de graus. Temos exatamente a mesma matriz aqui.
Agora vamos traçar essa pose em particular e ver
como ela se parece. E para fazer isso,
criarei um eixo para plotar, onde x
x vai variar de 0-5 e y
da mesma forma. Eu preciso definir a proporção para
que tudo pareça razoável, então
vou definir o eixo para que a proporção
seja quadrada. Vou adiar porque
preciso traçar algumas poses. A primeira pose
que vou plotar vou colocar na variável de espaço de
trabalho T1 e é a pose que olhei
há pouco: 1 na direção x,
2 na direção y e rotação de 30
graus. Aqui está uma transformação homogênea
matrix. Now I'm going to plot that.
To plot that I use the function trplot2. The
2 suffix means that it's for 2-dimensional
poses. Pass in the pose represented by the
homogeneous transformation. I'm going to plot
it as a frame named 1, and I'm going to plot
it in the color blue. There are quite a few
options there. And there we see the pose plotted.
We can see that it does indeed have a translational
component; 1 in the x direction, 2 in the
y direction. And it is rotated with respect
to the world coordinate frame.
I can create another pose quite easily. I
can create a pose that has got an offset of
2 in the x direction. 1 in the y direction
and no rotation. That's what the homogeneous
transformation looks like. Now I'm going to
plot that. I'm going to use the function trplot2
again, pass in the homogeneous transformation
matrix, and I’m going to plot it as a frame
labeled 2. To be different I'm going to plot
it as a red colored frame, and here we see
the second pose. It's got no rotation. It
has got a translational component.
Now I can compose 2 of these poses. I’m
going to say pose 3 is equal to pose 1 compounded
with pose 2. That's what the transformation
matrix looks like. I can plot that. I'm going
to plot that one, trplot2, pass in the matrix,
there's going to be a frame, called 3 and
I'm going to color that one green. So if
I compound those 2 poses I end up with the
pose shown here as 3. The way we can think
about this is we moved from the world frame
2 from frame 1 which is rotated, and then
in frame 1 we then moved 2 in the x direction
and 1 in the y direction. But X and Y direction
are frame 1, not on the world frame, and that
gets us to the frame labeled as frame 3.
I could compound the poses in the opposite
order. I'm going to create a new pose T4 and
it's going to be pose 2 compounded with pose
1. We can see that's what the homogeneous
transformation matrix looks like and it's
different to T3. I can plot this. I can pass
in T4. I can plot it as a frame labeled 4
and I'm going to plot it in the color cyan.
Here we can see the frame 4 which has resulted
from compounding pose 2 with post 1. Now I'm
going to introduce a point into the plot.
I'm going to introduce a point at a coordinate
3, 2. I need to transpose that so that it
becomes a column vector. There it is. I can
plot that. Plot point P, and I'm going to
plot it as an asterisk. There we see it in
our figure. If I want to determine the coordinate
of the point with respect to frame 1 then
what I need to do is to use the inverse of
the relative pose 1, which is that, and multiply
it by the points coordinate in homogeneous
form. I'll take point P and I'm going to append
a 1 to it. What I have now is the homogeneous
coordinate of the asterisk with respect to
the coordinate frame 1.